<!--
  Author: NE- https://github.com/NE-
  Date: 2022 September 23
  Purpose: Java Basics on Primitive Types
-->

# Primitive Data Types
- Eight types are: int, byte, short, long, float, double, boolean, and char.
  - Stored directly on the stack.

 | Type | Size (bits) | Min | Max |
 | ---- | ----------- | --- | --- |
 | `byte` | 8 | -2<sup>7</sup> | 2<sup>7</sup>-1 |
 | `short` | 16 | -2<sup>15</sup> | 2<sup>15</sup>-1 |
 | `int` | 32 | -2<sup>31</sup> | 2<sup>31</sup>-1 |
 | `long` | 64 | -2<sup>63</sup> | 2<sup>63</sup>-1 |
 | `float` | 32 | -2<sup>-149</sup> | (2-2<sup>-52</sup>) 2<sup>127</sup> |
 | `double` | 64 | -2<sup>-1074</sup> | 2<sup>1023</sup> |
 | `char` | 16 | 0 | 2<sup>16</sup>-1 |
 | `boolean` | 1 | - | - |

## `int`
- Default 32-bit signed two's compliment. Use `long` for 64-bit.
  - Decided for portability.
- Always default-initialized to 0.
- If `int` defined in a method, it *must* be initialized before use.
## `byte`
- Same as `int`, except only 8 bits.
- Default initialized to 0.
## `short`
- Used to save memory if byte too small, but int too big.
- Default initialized to 0.
## `long`
- Same as `int`, except 64 bits.
- Default initialized to 0.
## `float`
- Single precision fractional type.
  - If get past 6 digits, lose precision and get estimates instead.
  - Use Big Decimal class for absolute precision.
- 32 bit like `int`, but IEE 754 standard changes the range. Range is approximately 1.40239846×10<sup>-45</sup> to 3.40282347×10<sup>38</sup>.
- Default initialized to 0.0.
- Use 'f' after a literal number to declare it float, or else Java throws an error (default is double without it).
## `double`
- Double precision fractional type.
  - Precision up to 15 digits.
- Range approximately 4.9406564584124654×10<sup>-324</sup> to 1.7976931348623157×10<sup>308</sup>.
- Default initialized to 0.0.
- Attach 'D' after literal to designate as double.
## `boolean`
- Can only contain `true` or `false`.
- Java pads booleans in a single byte, though the value is stored in a bit.
- Default initialized to `false`.
## `char`
- Represent Unicode-encoded characters.
  - 16 bit so it holds `\u0000` to `\uFFFF`.
- Default initialized to `\u0000`.

# Overflow and Underflow
- Integers overflow as expected (rolls over to minimum and continues upwards); floating point numbers return Infinity.
```java
int i = Integer.MAX_VALUE;
int j = i + 1; // -2_147_483_648

double d = Double.MAX_VALUE;
double o = d + 1; // Infinity
```
- Underflow same behavior, except floating point numbers return 0.0.

# Autoboxing
- Java class implementation of the type that can be wrapped.
  - `Integer` class can wrap an `int`.
```java
// Automatic wrapping
Character c = 'q';
Integer i = 1;
```
