<!--
  Author: NE- https://github.com/NE-
  Date: 2022 September 23
  Purpose: Java Packages
-->

# Overview
- used to group related classes, interfaces, and sub-packages.
- Benefits:
  - Making related types easier to find.
  - Avoiding name conflicts.
  - Controlling access with access modifiers.

# Creation
- Use `package` statement as the very first line of a source file.
```java
package com.organization.name;
```
- Recommended to add each new type in a package.
  - Unpackaged types go directly into the *default* or unnamed package.
- *Default* package disadvantages:
  - Lose benefits of structure.
  - No sub-packages.
  - Can't import types in default package to other packages.
  `protected` and `package-private` access scopes are meaningless.
- *Default* package created for convenience with small or temporary projects or for beginners just learning.

# Naming Conventions
- Package names all lower cased.
- Period delimited.
- Names determined by company or organization.
- Reversed company URL.
```java
com.company

// sub-packages
com.company.packages
// or
com.company.packages.domain
```

## Directory Structure
- Each package and sub-package has its own directory.
```
com/company/packages
```

# Using Package Members
- To use member from a class in another package, we must import it.
- Can't import a single type or use asterisk to import all types in a package.
- Java core has its own packages we can use such as the `List` interface.
```java
package com.company.packages.domain;

public class TodoItem {
  private Long id;
  private String desc;

  // Mutators and accessors
}

// Importing
// - Import entire domain subpackage
import com.company.packages.domain.*;
// - Import only TodoItem class
import com.company.packages.domain.TodoItem;

// Import List interface class
import Java.util.List;
```

## Fully Qualified Name
- Some packages may have same named classes such as `java.sql.Date` and `java.util.Date`.
- Fully qualified class names fix the issue.
```java
import java.sql.Date;

private java.util.Date date;
private Date sql_date;
```

# Compilation
- Tell *javac* where to find files (based on project file structure).
- Compile dependencies before dependents.
```
javac com/company/packages/domain/TodoItem.java

# use -classpath for finding other compiled classes
javac -classpath . com/company/packages/*.java

# run withfully qualified name of main class
java com.company.packages.TodoApp
```
